# Virtual Machines

## General Information

Limitations:
- 20 VMs per region per subscription. Support ticket can increase limits.

Disk types:
- **managed disks**: managed by Azure. Up to 4TB.
- **unmanaged disks**: user is responsible for the storage accounts. Single account supports up to 20,000 input/output operations per second (~ 40 standards VHDs at full utilisation).

Get VM image list with the following command:
```powershell
az vm image list
```

## Virtual Machine Extensions

- **Custom Script Extension** - run custom scripts when the VM is provisioned.
- **PowerShell Desired State Configuration Extension** - sets up PowerShell DSC.
- **Azure Diagnostics Extension** - configures VM to collect diagnostics data.

Azure supports **cloud-init** for Linux VMs that support it. Works with all major automation tooling like:
- Ansible
- Chef
- SaltStack
- Puppet

## Availability Zones

Availability zone is a physically separate zone, within an Azure region. There are three Availability Zones per Azure region.

There are two categories of services that support Availability Zones:
- **Zonal services** - a resource pinned to a specific zone, or
- **Zone-redundant services** - replicates automatically across zones.

## Availability Sets

Allows Azure to understand how to build application for redundancy and availability. Composed of:
- **fault domain (FDs)** - logical group of hardware that shares common power source and network switch (similar to a rack within a datacentre).
- **upgrade domain (UDs)** - logical group of hardware that can undergo maintenance (only one upgrade domain at a time in no particular order).

## Scale Sets

Allows creation of a group of load balanced VMs that are scaled automatically.

## Load Balancer

Uses Layer-4 (TCP, UDP) load balancing. Health probe monitors each VM on a given port. VMs are connected to a load balancer with their network interface card (NIC).

Load balancer rules for specific ports and protocols are defined to control the flow of traffic to VMs.

## VM Sizes

- General purpose (A-series, B-series, D-series)
- Compute optimised (F-series)
- Memory optimised (E-series, D-series, G-series, M-series)
- Storage optimised (L-series)
- GPU (N-series)
- High performance compute (H-series)

## Upload Windows Image to Azure

Azure supports both generation 1 and generation 2 VMs that are in VHD file format and that have a fixed-size disk. The maximum size allowed for the IS VHD on a generation 1 VM is 2 TB.

VHDX file can be converted to VHD, dynamically expanding disk to a fixed-size disk, but VM generation cannot be changed.

## Az CLI

Create a new resource group:
```powershell
az group create --name az204-vm-rg --location uksouth
```

Create a Linux VM:
```powershell
az vm create `
    --resource-group az204-vm-rg `
    --name az204vm `
    --image UbuntuLTS `
    --generate-ssh-keys `
    --admin-username pavels
```

Open port `80`:
```powershell
az vm open-port --resource-group az204-vm-rg --name az204vm --port 80
```

Remove created resource group:
```powershell
az group delete --name az204-vm-rg --yes
```