# Virtual Machines

## General Information

Limitations:
- 20 VMs per region per subscription. Support ticket can increase limits.

Disk types:
- **managed disks**: managed by Azure. Up to 4TB.
- **unmanaged disks**: user is responsible for the storage accounts. Single account supports up to 20,000 input/output operations per second (~ 40 standards VHDs at full utilisation).

Get VM image list with the following command:
```powershell
az vm image list
```

## Virtual Manchine Extensions

- **Custom Script Extension** - run custom scripts when the VM is provisioned.
- **PowerShell Desired State Confiuration Extension** - sets up PowerShell DSC.
- **Azure Diagnostics Extension** - configures VM to collect diagnostics data.

Azure supports **cloud-init** for Linux VMs that support it. Works with all major automation tooling like:
- Ansible
- Chef
- SaltStack
- Puppet

## Availability Zones

Availability zone is a physically separate zone, within an Azure region. There are three Availability Zones per Azure region.

There are two categories of services that support Availability Zones:
- **Zonal services** - a resource pinned to a specific zone, or
- **Zone-redundant services** - replicates automatically across zones.

## Availability Sets

Allows Azure to understand how to build application for redundancy and availability. Composed of:
- **fault domain (FDs)** - logical group of hardware that shares common power source and network switch (similar to a rack within a datacentre).
- **upgrade domain (UDs)** - logical group of hardware that can undergo maintenence (only one upgrade domain at a time in no particulat order).

## Scale Sets

Allows creation of a group of load balanced VMs that are scaled automatically.

## Load Balancer

Uses Layer-4 (TCP, UDP) load balancing. Health probe monitors each VM on a given port. VMs are connected to a load balancer with their network interface card (NIC).

Load balancer rules for specific ports and protocols are defined to control the flow of trafic to VMs.